how to study for biology

i am a college freshman and gosh i never thought i would struggle this much in biology.

i understand the general info for all the topics cover in class but when it comes to applying (exams and tests) i just lose my mind. i feel like i just know everything only on the surface level and don’t actually understand anything in-depth.

do you guys know any study methods that are effective when studying for biology?

i have tried active recall but it just helps me memorize but not with application questions

Make power point with some buddies and try to "teach" them the topic you struggle more. Ask them for feedback and when you explain a topic to others you retain nearly 80% of it.

I would create drawing maps like this->causes->this->cause->this

and then I would brake something in the path way to get

this->breaks->this won't happen->causing this to not happen->end result

And challenge my brain to see what doesn't happen when certain pathways brake.

Then to take notes, I put EVERYTHING in question format and ALWAYS rewriting my notes IN MY OWN WORDS (this helps cement everything into your brain) Example: Q: what is the central dogma? Notes: take notes on question A: write out answer in full sentences in your own words!!!

Then it is so easy when at night, you just look at the questions and quiz yourself before bed or in your free time and you have the answer to check. Over time the recalling will get faster and then using the charts will bring in the recalled knowledge to help aid in critical thinking!

Biology is special because most people think it is just memorizing, but it is NOT. It teaches you to critically think about something and have an imagination to solve problems (how can this be fixed). It is honestly a hard skill to learn at first, but with time it gets so much easier!

Feel free to message me for more tips on how to study biology. This was kind of a quick and dirty way to explain effective biology study habits. I used to tutor people all the time and I looooove studying biology after I figured out how to study.

This comment deserves an award, but I'm kinda new to reddit and dont have any.

Index cards helped me to learn characteristics and phylogeny. Processes were harder. Agreed with recommendations above.

I would also emphasize that a TA or instructor might make assumptions about a students prior course work and understanding of bio. This is wildly unfair to students who are capable and dedicated but favors certain backgrouds.

I would recommend checking in with your student services office. If its hard to take notes and follow lecture they may be able to find someone to share lecture notes with you. Also recommend office hours or askibg the TA to help form a study group. I learned so much from hanging around office hours and listening to answers from other questions and hearing from those better equipped to entaer bio course work.

I got you ;)

This may be very tedious, but it helps me understand a biological process from start to finish a lot better and gives a handy reference for future use. I comprehend things a lot easier if they are in a map/ diagram format, so, I will make as detailed of a diagram with short annotations.

Like say with DNA transcription. I literally drew out a step by step process showing which proteins became involved at each process, where, short sentence description of what is happening (like what is bonding to what), and then a summary of the step that is a little more detailed before drawing our the next. Trying to show a decent amount of detail (line structures w/ important groups labeled) in the depictions of macromolecules.

Like I said, it takes a good amount of time, but it has helped me memorize the process with greater depth.

That’s called a mind map. There’s actual software that helps to create them. It’s one of the better ways to learn. Windows has an app called MindMaple that I’ve tried and think works well. There’s also Mind Maps Pro but I haven’t used that one enough to give feedback.

Had no idea there was a term and an industry for that method!

Don’t feel too bad. Introductory biology is focused on acquiring a knowledge base, so it favors those who are talented at memorizing lists. It makes no attempt at understanding in depth. That comes in the higher level courses. I had the same problem. However, the more advanced the classes were, the better I did because high level thinking is more important for those (I am a professor in biomedical research at a major Med school now). Persist. As for studying, repetition worked best for me. Mnemonics, flash cards, writing lists are helpful. If you are like I was, you may not excel at the lower level courses, but you will excel later.

Create “creative” materials that summarize the main ideas and details of the topic. Use tabloid-sized paper (11 x 17) and make it fun, with little drawings - see videos on “how to sketchnote”.

Test yourself rather than re-reading notes (which btw is one of the most ineffective study strategies) - this can be through flashcards, study groups, and predicting test questions that you answer.

Make mind/idea maps that show connections between the ideas in a unit.

Any time spent time forcing recall (like self-testing) or spending quality time with the material (like sketch noting) will help.

So a couple of things for you to consider. You’re a freshman so I’m assuming you’re taking intro/general chem and some type of cellular bio (“bio101”). So there’s a lot going on there. The reason you take chemistry is to understand biology. But the connection of WHY needs you to learn more than you have so far. I teach at the college level and each student has what I call the “aha” moment where disparate pieces of info begin to click into place. But it requires some time and patience for that understanding to develop. Once it does, biology becomes easier because you have the framework of understanding that allows you to add new info faster. So what do you do until that moment? Fake it till you make it.

The funny thing is that you look around the room at other students and probably think am I the only one having a problem? And the answer is of course not. Every student is trying to figure it out. Some will do that faster than others. But once you get that ‘aha’ moment, it does become easier. But a few weeks into the semester, most students are struggling.

What are things you can do to help hasten that moments arrival? I’d recommend mind maps. The entire process for them is tough to explain here. But if you Google them, you’ll find lots of helpful resources. Flashcards were my go-to back in the day. If you want a more modern version try Quizlet. It’s digital flashcards with features like “learn” and test. (Seriously the learn feature is cool, if you keep getting a card wrong it shows up more frequently to help you figure it out.) The thing I would avoid is ‘just’ writing notes in lecture and not actively thinking about material.

Also, (and I’m going to type this in caps) USE YOUR SCHOOL STUDY RESOURCES. If there are study centers or tutor rooms, go use them. Ask the tutors questions. They are literally being paid to help you. Office hours for your prof? Go say hi and ask about how mitochondria function in person. Most professors would love to spend their office hours helping you instead of reading emails. Seriously.

Also, no one is an island. Develop a set of friends you can rely on to help study. Monday-Friday is study days. Weekends are for fun. Get on a study schedule and stick to it. Meet your friends at designated times to study. It’s the same as working out, buddies keep you honest. Also, practice this saying “sorry I can’t go to that thing. I have an appointment then.” Use that when someone is trying to draw you out of your designated study times. Most people won’t ask what type of appointment, so you can keep study times sacrosanct.

Also, figure out your attention span. My wifes is about 5-10 minutes. Mine is 45-ish minutes. When we met, I set a different study schedule for her than her “hours of cramming” and she noticed immediate dividends. (She had asked why I could study for such long spans and it never seemed to help her the same way. A bit of observation showed me her attention span.) Study around your attention span is the biggest part of the study schedule. Can’t concentrate for more than 10 minutes? Never study more than 10 minutes before a break. Take five minutes and then do the next ten. You might do five half-hour sessions split into two 10 minute segments and two 5 minute breaks. Or you might do two hour long study sessions because that’s how you roll. The way you study matters. Figure this out and you don’t have to read something five times to comprehend it once.

Most importantly, remember that you can do this. But try not to do it all on your own!

thank you sooo much!! i’m still kind of waiting for my “aha” moment haha :))

Try to connect biology to something you do understand. Say, cooking a multi course meal. Or legos toys and each box/toy and all the pieces and how the whole set goes together. Or maybe even how your house works. (This idea honestly makes the most sense). Try to relate one part of a cell to every part of your home (or whatever you choose) and go from there. I’m sure you know what the kitchen parts do, the toilets, even the people inside, to what does what in a cell. That done, then work outward giving relatable functions to everything you do understand. The neighborhood. The city. The state. The country. Cars driving by, sewer systems, birds flying about, any little function and relate it. You can go farther inward, too. But start with a cell and find a thing you do understand and begin creating parallel relationships to the functions. I am not going to give you answers to this because YOU need to relate each part so it makes sense to YOU. This is huge for transfer of knowledge for complex subjects. I hope this makes sense.

Edit - spelling and clarity.

THIS!! THANK YOU SO MUCH THIS HELPED ME OUT SOOOOO MUCH

For sure!! I am glad I could help!

I studied it a long time ago, (was a Bio major for a while, so took tons of science classes) but rewriting notes (yeah, it was longhand back then) really helped. And taking some pertinent notes from the book. It was hard, but I got through it with probably a B or B+.

And I went to college in my mid-20's. Actually, was a much better student than I would have after H.S.

I always loved biology and other related sciences, but boy did I have a lot to learn, besides the basics.

Krebs cycle! My god that was hard!

I majored in biology and graduated with a 3.9, I didn’t listen to how I was told to study. I used flashcards, first spending a time period making questions and thinking about my answer for them. Then going back and answering them the next day or so, and then reviewing. I also used sticky notes or flashcards to make little puzzles for things like cycles. Also pay attention to examples for everything you can! Examples show you how these concepts are applied to the real world.

which biology are in? intro, molecular, biochem, micro....?

i think intro..? the course is called biology of a cell

I know the book. So, I have a PhD in molecular biology and I know exactly what you're feeling. Biology is very complex, and if you're a bio major you have an awesome road in front of you. What you need to do, is trust that road. Read, digest, read again, VISIT OFFICE HOURS whether for the prof or TA - this is very important because talking about these insecurties will help alleviate them. I'm sure you're doing great. Don't let yourself get stuck in your head. Science is a collaborative venture, collaborate with your classmates and teachers.

What type of field you are in, and what specifically doo you need help with. Can you give an example of a question.

its a lot more chemistry than bio and i’m struggling with memorization for bio and for chemistry i am just kind of lost i don’t even know where to start

Are you referring to Chemical reactions in Biological Pathways. Then they are easy. Most of the people have problem with how a particular pathway works, because of the huge biomolecules. You just gotta, first of all, understand Organic Chemistry, no need to go too deep, just understand the basics of Organic Chemistry, valency of Carbon,Oxygen, Nitrogen their bonding with each other, compounds they form with each other like Alcohols, Amines, Acetyl compounds, energy utilized in making and breaking the bonds. Then you read about the Biomolecules, Glucose, fructose, moving upto fatty acids and lipids. The last step is to read about the Bio-Enzymes used in reactions, like Phosphatase etc. That's it. That's how you start it and master it. Probably will take two weeks of solid study.

Draw a ton of diagrams and pictures!! And take you time with them as well.

I have drawn so many maps and diagrams and pictures with explanations and arrows and what not. Your text probably has a lot of diagrams and I would copy those or make ones similar. And make it look good with colors and titles so you actually take time making them and so it forces you to go over the information slower so you also learn while making them.

thank you so much!

First off, don’t let this get you down. I remember intro bio being very hard just because of how much information you have to learn at once without knowing the ‘in-depth stuff’ that makes the big picture stuff make sense. Don’t let it discourage you! I got a C in intro bio but have gotten all As since going into higher level courses (molec, micro, neuro, etc). As you get into higher level classes the intro class info makes a lot more sense.

My #1 tip is read ahead: see what you will cover in class ahead of time and read in the textbook or watch YouTube lessons about the subject the night before. This will help you learn the vocabulary prior to the lecture so the lecture will stick in your brain and you’ll be able to ask and answer questions about the topic during the lecture. Repetition of the information is key for intro classes.

Another tip is to rewrite your notes throughout the week. I look at my notes and try to rearrange them and condense it so it flows and makes it easier to remember. Then I use that version of the notes to make an even more condensed study guide before the exams. This is something that you should do throughout the week so you can take it piece-by-piece instead of overloading your brain with info. (Ik that is a lot of work, but even rewriting them once will help so much)

I know that seems like a lot of work, but it saves you more frustration/time in the long run because you’re not rushing to learn all the info at once before a test. I’d also talk to your professor about it, they know the class better than anyone else. Go to their office hours and tell them that you’re concerned because you’re having a hard time retaining the material, they probably have plenty of tips and resources for you. They’ll let you know what you should focus on for the exams. Plus, it’s always good to start making connections in your department early on, professors like to see that you care about their class.

And of course, just make sure you’re sleeping and eating right. Give yourself study breaks when it’s getting hard to keep focused. Your brain can’t learn if it’s tired and getting enough sleep is crucial for retaining the info you worked so hard to study.

Hope this helps!

thank you so much for your comment!