Which school should I pick?

Hi! I'm a senior in high school and I’ve been accepted into a few colleges, but I’m trying to decide between these three:

Hofstra University
Adelphi University
Farmingdale State College
I’ll be going in as a Biology major, and my main concern is choosing a school where I won’t struggle too much. I’m not looking for the “easiest” option in a lazy way—I care about my education and GPA—but I also don’t want to end up failing classes and having to pay to retake them. I'll be commuting, so I don't really consider the social aspect and the parties.

Basically, I just want to go somewhere where I can manage the workload and succeed. If anyone has experience with these schools or knows which one is more manageable, specifically if you're going on a pre-med track.

Also, I’ve already checked RateMyProfessor.com, but it didn’t really help me make a clear decision. I’m hoping to hear from people who actually attended or know what the workload and professors are like at these schools.

Bio department at Adelphi are all sweethearts imo, they’re the best. Prof Aram Stump, Lawrence Hobbie, and Joona Coombs are amazing people, you can take a look at their reviews and see for yourself.

I went to both schools ( Adelphi and Hofstra ) My advice would be to go to Ncc and then transfer to save money

My biased perspective is that Adelphi is the best choice. We offer small classes, direct access to faculty, lots of academic support, and have student success as our primary goal. If you are willing to put in the effort, you'll do great here!

Please consider financial aid! Idk what category you fall in but plz consider that two are private and one is a public school! Try not to fall into any student loans and focus on your studies! Visit each school, look through the departments and then do your best to make a decision :)

I would suggest where you get the most aid, especially if you want to go to grad school or medical school. My friend only had to pay 5k a semester at Adelphi (as a local) with financial aid which was something she was able to pay. We both graduated with no loans or anything (I went to Stony Brook, paid about 7k due to my parents income) and we’re both now in grad school and had to take out a pretty penny for loans. Undergrad is important yes, but consider all your options in terms of finances. Leave room for spending big bucks for your FURTHER education. Best choice we both made.

Yeah I 100% agree with your comment! 

As of right now, Farmingdale is a full ride for me.  If I were to choose Adelphi, I’d have to pay 6k a semester, and if I were to choose Hofstra, I’d have to pay about 7,500 a semester. 

I had many friends from Stony get into Ivy’s for grad school/med school and full scholarships. A public education will still get you a good education (:

All three are great schools; Hofstra probably best known/ranked nationally for academics, followed by Adelphi then Farmingdale. Their costs follow same order.

Adelphi allows you to manage your course load well. There has been an increase in sections for core courses allowing easier registration, and the One-Stop Center streamlines registration, payment/financial aid, housing, employment into a seamless personalized experience. Professors have been accessible and classes small- the largest lecture I experienced had around 30 students. It feels like a small college in terms of access and attention with resources of a larger university. I can’t speak to being a biology major, though science courses have been challenging and professors helpful where extra efforts and tutorials needed. Sports /fitness facilities at Adelphi are great, though the teams do well Others can give you better sense of athletics experience if that’s of interest

Adelphi has a great location- really close (walking distance about 10 mins) to Garden City downtown and train station, or about same distance to slightly closer Nassau Boulevard train station. Manhattan about 45 mins away. Garden City with downtown, malls is quiet, has enough services and very safe/upscale but not exciting college town. It’s likely a nicer location than Farmingdale which is sprawling suburb or Hempstead - county seat and a mini-city with a few areas a but sketchy.

Wish you well wherever you choose; congrats on your acceptances!

Thank you so much! I appreciate your comment!! 

Hey I’m also going thru this issue between choosing colleges rn but instead of a bio major I want to do a MBA in finance and I don’t know whether to choose Adelphi or Farmingdale (I would transfer to stony brook to complete my masters since farmingdale doesn’t offer an MBA). Do you think Adelphi would be worth going to for a MBA bc it’s mainly known for nursing. Also I’m not completely opposed to farmingdale but its low graduation rate really scares me and im not sure if that’s the right choice for me. Like which one do u think would get me high paying jobs in business lol ?

i’m a commuter at adelphi and the school provides shuttle buses to take us to the lirr stations! (mineola, nassau blvd, and hempstead) i would say pick the school that gives you the most money though!

Hey how is ur experience there so far and do yk anything ab the MBA program?

Adelphi and Farmingdale! Would be my top choices for you