Prerequisite Coursework

What courses do I need to take as a pre-med?

Read through this document from MSAR Reports for Applicants and Advisors to see what courses are required by specific MD schools. There is also information on whether P/F, AP, online, and CC courses are accepted. For DO schools, the Choose DO Explorer has information on coursework is required or recommended in the Premedical Coursework section for each school.

Each medical school will have different undergraduate courses which you are either required or strongly recommended to take prior to matriculating.

Strict Prerequisites: Schools have requirements such as 1 year of physics, 1 year of general chemistry, etc.
Competency-based Prerequisites: Some schools have "competencies" which must be met by coursework of your choosing. For example, a school may have a "behavioral sciences" competency which may be met by taking courses in psychology, sociology, history, anthropology, ethics and/or courses in related subject areas.
Make sure to check the websites of schools you plan on applying to (especially your in-state schools) prior to starting undergrad so you can plan to fit all of their pre-reqs into your undergraduate coursework. Pre-requisite courses vary by school. This list is meant to serve as a guideline.

1 year = 2 semesters = 3 quarters

If you go to a quarter-system school and are trying to meet a 1-semester requirement, you unfortunately should take 2 quarters of the class to be safe.

Required & Recommended Courses

Hard Requirements:

one year of introductory biology + lab1
one year of general chemistry + lab1
one year of organic chemistry + lab1 OR one semester of organic chemistry1 + one semester of biochemistry1
one year of physics + lab (typically Mechanics and E&M; algebra-based is fine)1
one year of English
one year of college-level math (generally one year of calculus OR one semester of calculus + one semester of statistics)
Highly Recommended Courses:

1 semester of biochemistry1
1 semester of statistics
1 semester psychology1
1 semester sociology1
Mildly Recommended Courses:

2 semesters of non-introductory upper-division biology courses (genetics1, physiology1, cell biology1, anatomy, microbiology, etc.)
Additional assorted humanities/social science courses (history, economics, political science, etc.)
1 Generally considered useful for the MCAT

Grades in Prerequisite Courses

What is the minimum acceptable grade for pre-reqs?

To be safe, you should have a grade of C or higher in all prerequisite courses. This means if your final grade is a C- in any of the required prerequisites, you should plan to retake the course. If your college considers a C- a high enough grade that they do not allow you to retake the course, you should plan to retake the course at another institution.
Here are some examples of schools with this minimum clearly stated as part of their admissions requirements:
USUHS: "Applicants must receive a letter grade of C or higher in prerequisite courses. C- is not accepted."
ECU: "All prerequisite coursework must be completed with a grade of a “C” or above. A “C-” on the plus/minus scale is considered lower than a 'C.'"
MSU CHM: "A grade of C (2.0 on a 4-point scale) or higher must be achieved to meet prerequisite standards."
MWU AZCOM: "Grades of C or better (grades of C- are not acceptable)"
KCU COM: "Prerequisite undergraduate coursework (completed with a grade of C or better)"
AP Credit

Medical schools have different policies on whether students may use AP credit to fulfill a pre-req. This information can be found on MSAR and in this document from MSAR Reports for Applicants and Advisors.
If a school accepts AP credit, that credit must show up on your official university transcript. You may not submit an AP score report to receive AP credit for a medical school pre-req.
Pass/Fail Coursework

As a general rule to make your life and applications easier, do not take medical school prerequisites Pass/Fail (or any other variation, including S/U, CR/NC, etc.). This document from MSAR Reports for Applicants and Advisors shows whether schools accept P/F coursework. Some schools do. Some schools don't. Some accept it for recommended courses but not required courses. Some are case-by-case. Some do but only for a specific time range during COVID. Make your life less complicated and keep the letter grade.
This is another document from MSAR Reports for Applicants and Advisors with some additional info on schools and their policies for P/F coursework during the COVID-19 pandemic. For DO schools, the Choose DO Explorer includes whether schools accept P/F and online coursework under the Admissions section for each school.
See our COVID-19 wiki page for more information on P/F coursework due to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Coursework Timeline

What is the recommended timeline for my pre-reqs?

If you are a "traditional applicant" (i.e. do not plan on taking any gap years), the below schedule will keep you on track in terms of medical school science pre-reqs.

Freshman Year: One year of introductory biology with lab. One year of general chemistry with lab.
Sophomore Year: One year of organic chemistry with lab.
Junior Year: One year of physics with lab. One semester of biochemistry.
Traditional applicants should take the MCAT before the end of May during/after their Junior year. Traditional applicants apply during the summer before their senior year, with AMCAS generally opening up at the beginning of May.
Depending on what AP/dual enrollment/etc. credit you come in with, you will also need to squeeze in a year of math (many schools are beginning to require statistics as a pre-req) and a semester/year of English.

Do I need to take all these courses by the time I apply?

Required pre-requisite courses must be completed by the time of matriculation, not application. It is fine if you are planning to take the remainder of your pre-reqs during your application cycle. However, try not to create a situation where you are taking a pre-req during your app cycle, receive a grade of C- or lower, and have to rush a retake the summer immediately prior to matriculation!
Here are some examples of schools reassuring you this is allowed:
UW: "The pre-medical course requirements must be completed before matriculating."
Yale: "These prerequisites do not need to be completed to apply but must be met prior to matriculation."
Harvard: "Prerequisites do not need to be completed in order to submit an application to Harvard Medical School; however, the required courses (and/or any degree programs an applicant is enrolled in) must be completed prior to matriculation. The majority of successful applicants will have completed most of the required courses prior to application."