Cell Biology vs. Genetics

I think cell bio was more useful for pharmacy school, but genetics was much easier (at least where I took it). PCAT-wise I don't remember either being too important (but could be remembering wrong).
I would take genetics if I needed a GPA boost, I guess and cell bio if I was okay.

Looking at my GPA now, a GPA booster would be more favourable.

However, genetics at my school has a 3 hour lab component every week while cell biology does not.

I'd probably just talk to students at my school then and ask which they thought would be easier. Lab can be a grade booster or killer depending on the teacher. I took a genetics lab that wasn't connected to the course (it was a prerequisite but you could just take the lecture) and it wasn't bad, but it can depend.

I've talked to two people about it. They both said cell biology is better in terms of the difficulty of the course. This comes mostly from the professors as those who teach genetics at my school, are subpar. They also added that the labs do not correspond well with the lectures, and that the coordinators and TA's are not very good. One of them did say that genetics was mostly high school stuff though.

Another thing is that if I go with cell biology, I'd have to squish two second-year chemistry courses into one semester. So, I'm stuck in a pickle: I could either take genetics and be able to divide my chemistry courses into two semesters, or I could take cell biology in the first semester and then take two chemistry courses in the second semester.

It's more important you do well in general chem, imo. So, it's up to you what will let you do best there.
Also, your school will let you take chem 1 and 2 in the same semester??? I thought 1 was a prerequisite for 2 normally.

They're actually second-year chemistry courses, specifically organic II and thermodynamics/kinetics (physical).

Depends on proff to proff. Any of tjose subject can be taught easly or hard core. Genetics was harder for me as I have to do alot of conceptual thinking and alot of cellular pathways. Cell bio was just memorization. Cell bio would be better for pharm and health science. Genetics is best for going into research as PCR techniques and many other techniques will be helpful. Over all if you can take everything.